flourish man's bride Logies I ride in
this wind on my good horse I call you my
shiny black bears to the Playhouse saw
told you to take the bride's silver and
gold you had tea from somebody you're
listening to unwelcome guests on weo s
geneva 90.3 and 89.7 FM i'm lynne gary
today's broadcast will focus on the
actual purpose of US military activity
and expenditure abroad and it's splendid
success in the caribbean and central
america its creation a pool a slave
labor that can undermine the wages of US
workers while reaping enormous profits
for transnational corporations in our
first hour we'll continue with our
lecture series by dr. Michael Parenti
his talk today the sword and the dollar
in the second hour we'll hear from
teenage workers in El Salvador and Haiti
about how little they earn and eat your
average finger lakes cow lives better
than they do and we'll hear from one of
the survivors of a massacre in a
Guatemalan village whose people were
killed wholesale to make way for a World
Bank sponsored dam project built to
provide electricity for maquiladoras in
the city what you hear in today's
program will outrage and disgust you but
this is about more than feeling
compassion for someone far away our
fates are tied to there's half a million
US apparel jobs have been lost to these
macula Dory's as a result of the North
American Free Trade Agreement
NAFTA and corporations are using their
ability to export labor to force
Americans to work harder for less last
New Year's Eve I was coming home
every way it was 2 a.m. really cold and
snowing hard we pulled off at a gas
station on the Weedsport exit there was
an old man in a beat-up car delivering
newspapers in the cold and dark the old
man looked like a guy who worked hard
all his life and here he was working for
peanuts in the cold of New Year's Eve
sadly this guy probably thought he was
doing honest work it's not honest when
people's lives are spent in labor that
enriches others and leaves them poor
that is criminal if you're old enough to
remember the 60s you may recall the
glowing predictions of futurists that
automation and technology would create a
future filled with leisure and
prosperity this has come to pass but
only for a tiny minority the rest of us
are working harder for less the fact is
that less workers are needed due to
technological advancements and so
prisons are being built at an
accelerating rate to return that surplus
humanity to profitability as slave
laborers working for a fraction of the
minimum wage and our hoodwinked people
keep falling for the tough-on-crime
rhetoric the people imprisoned for
murder rate and other violence represent
a minority of prisoners two-thirds of
the people in prison are there on
nonviolent drug convictions and many of
the others are simply poor who knows how
many thousands have committed no crime
at all but are there simply because they
are poor young and black and have been
framed to beef up the arrest statistics
of corrupt police forces and the
corporate bosses laugh all the way to
the bank this program is actually a
class and learning to read between the
lines of the lies our so-called leaders
spout by the end of this course you will
gain a different understanding about
what is meant by defending democracy
tough on crime or on drugs economic
empowerment zone and free trade now dr.
Michael for rent
welcome to people's video/audio a series
of talks by author and political analyst
Michael Parenti his books include
democracy for the few land of idols
political mythology in America and
against Empire the topic of today's talk
is the sword and the dollar the history
of imperialism and the force
maldevelopment of the third world it was
given in Marin California February 1994
here's Michael Parenti Central America
as you know like most of the third world
is suffering from acute poverty and
economic stagnation and this is called
under development and this under
development is treated in academia and
in the media and by government officials
elsewhere as an original historical
condition it's something that that was
always there it's due to the poverty of
the land the climate makes people lazy I
learned that when I was a kid I remember
teachers saying that people in the
warmer climates just don't work as hard
as we do you know mañana mañana and all
that whereas we in the temperate
climates we work hard it's due to
overpopulation they have too many
children and it's due to cultural
backwardness these are the reasons given
the reasons given to explain poverty in
the third world are the same as the
reasons given to explain poverty in the
United States itself except the climatic
one with all these others are lazy too
many kids blood buy the other thing in
fact the lands of Central America are
very rich lands the lands of the
third-world throughout Asia Africa Latin
America that's why the Europeans went
through all the trouble to go there to
steal and plunder and settle them in
fact these warm climates have produced
ancient and magnificent civilizations
back when the Europeans was still
hunting pigs with sticks
they were great civilizations in places
in fact they're more overpopulated today
they're more overpopulated today than
they were in the earliest centuries
before the Europeans came so
overpopulation is more a result of under
development than a cause
in fact that cultural backwardness you
know that is that's a theme that's as
old as Columbus he was using it to
justify enslaving people the eye look of
the people in the 16th century and I
said the Europeans had supremacy really
cultural supremacy in just two areas one
was the whole area of navigational
transportation and the other was in the
instruments of war and armaments and
firepower and it was that superior
firepower not superior civilization that
brought them to the positions of
supremacy that they are in now through
the centuries of colonization there were
other elaborate theories that were
framed one of the most interesting is
the one that came along about the mid to
late nineteenth century that the
colonized people are biologically
backward biologically undeveloped the
savages that the inferior level of
cultural evolution this assumes they
have an inferior level is commensurate
with an inferior biological evolution
none other than Charles Darwin himself
you know I learned in school that
Herbert Spencer was the social Darwinist
remember Herbert Spencer in the school
of social Darwinism where they took
Darwin's scientific findings and they
applied them to the economy well when I
read Darwin I found that the Darwin
himself was a social Darwinist he had
all these kinds of theories about how
naturally inferior these people were
well how were they really culturally
inferior their architectural skills
horticulture crafts hunting fishing
technology midwifery medicines herbs and
their tribal democratic practices were
often much better more advanced much
more an object of admiration than
anything that could have been found in
Europe at that time
I mean we mustn't romanticize these
original societies some of which did
have unjust and cruel practices
of their own but generally you know I
looked at them when I say you know where
they lag behind mostly were they lag
behind 16th 17th 18th and 19th century
Europe this is the list I could come up
with hangings murders syphilis gonorrhea
smallpox typhoid bubonic plague poverty
both urban and rural slavery
prostitution religious wars and
inquisitional witch hunts those areas I
would say Europe took first place in
those century the poverty the poverty of
Central America in the third-world
masses of people crowded into urban
slums living utter destitution in rural
villages at times illiteracy
unemployment hunger disease comes
because the land is given over to
commercial cash export crops then
absentee ownership it comes because
they're growing coffee sugar beef for
export instead of beans and rice for
indigenous consumption home consumption
domestic consumption the labor and the
resources of Central America are devoted
to one thing primarily capital
accumulation especially emphasis on the
labor I gave the example once of El
Salvador I was looking at who's in El
Salvador
you know was in El Salvador the fortune
500 everybody
Cargill General Motors all these
corporations are down there in Central
America harvester Chase Manhattan in El
Salvador and I said what's in El
Salvador some sugar some cotton what are
they all doing there and they're down
there for that other ingredient in the
productive process the one that really
creates a surplus value which is human
labor and the Salvadoran workers are
producing everything from energy rods to
baby powder to cooking powder baking
powder rubber tires computers automobile
parts all this is being done for other
consumption markets it's called
outsourcing where the companies go
down and bring the stuff and use the
cheap labor and all those transportation
costs to do that make it worth it it's
still more profitable to do that and to
have those things put together in El
Salvador than in Ohio because in Ohio
you pay people $10 an hour and down
there you pay them 60 cents an hour so
the labor and resources are devoted to
one thing primarily capital accumulation
self sustenance and self-employment
gives way to wage labor and that pattern
is very striking in the third world
throughout the third world from 1970 to
1980 the number of wage workers in the
third world grew from 72 million to 120
million and the rate is accelerating
that same pattern exists in the United
States back in the middle of the last
century or early part of the 1800s
seventy-five percent of this population
u.s. population was self-employed today
it's about eight percent I mean it's
been a gradual decline 48 2015 we go
right downs down about eight now and
many self-employed people are really
self employed on the sufferance of some
other larger supplier the essence of
capital investment is not to uplift the
country or develop it not to bring
civilization those are the patronizing
ethnocentric rationales that are given
when we do hear that the developed
countries North must help the
underdeveloped countries
what does underdeveloped mean it means
[ __ ] in some way you just didn't go
through a certain process they're not as
capable of evolving they need aid they
need Peace Corps volunteers to show them
how to do things they need missionaries
and movies in McDonald's and Donald Duck
and Mickey Mouse especially Mickey Mouse
and be cognizant that underdeveloped
carries some negative connotations the
third world nations and the UN and the
Wall Street Journal and most communist
parties in the world publications
left right and center all now use
another term which I do not ever use in
my writings a slightly less insulting
but hilariously inaccurate term they're
called developing nations so they're
just late bloomers I use third-world
because I find developing to be a very
deceptive term a euphemistic way of
saying underdeveloped it presumes that
poverty was an original condition it
presumes that these countries are
developing and in fact in many of them
the conditions getting worse the people
in these countries don't need to be
taught how to form they need the land to
form in the implements they don't need
to be taught how to fish they know how
to fish they need the boats in the nets
and access to shore frontage and bays
and oceans they need someone to stop the
chemical plants from dumping their toxic
infusions into the waters and rivers
they don't need to be convinced that
they should use hygienic standards they
don't need a Peace Corps volunteer to
tell them that to tell them to boil
their water especially when they can't
find any wood to light a fire with they
need the conditions that will allow them
to have clean drinking water and clean
clothes and homes they don't need
nutritional advice on balanced diets
from North Americans they need food and
they usually know better than the North
Americans what foods serve their
nutritional needs
usually under development what's called
under development is a condition which
is forcefully imposed on these countries
through history one of the most dramatic
examples is India in 1810 India was
exporting more textiles finished
mass-market textiles not just those
beautiful exquisite silks that we always
associate with Indian mass-market
textile was exporting more textiles to
England than England was exporting to
India and more to China and more to
Egypt more to number of other places in
1810 by 1830 the British had put up
prohibitive barriers and blocked out
Indian Goods and had moved in and were
dumping their goods in
and within a matter of another 10 years
the great textile centers of Dhaka and
Madras were turned into ghost towns and
the people was sent back out on the land
to do what to raise the cotton the raw
materials that would be used in the
factories of Manchester and Lancashire
in London so that India was reduced to
being a cow like much of the third world
to be milked and not to be developed and
by 1850 India's debt had grown to 53
million pounds and from 1850 to 1900 the
per capita income in India dropped by
2/3
almost 2/3 65% that's an incredible drop
so we always associate India with
poverty the master party that's not
their original condition is not an
underdeveloped country England
underdeveloped India Ireland is another
example Ireland is a country that's not
usually associated with the third world
well it's the first colony England's
very first it was the first imperialism
goes back to what 13th century 14th
century whatever angles was in Ireland
spent some time there Frederick angles
call Marx's collaborator for the benefit
of some who might not recognize the name
in 1856 he wrote quote how often have
the Irish started out to achieve
something and every time they have been
crushed politically and industrially by
consistent oppression they have been
artificially converted into an utterly
poverty very interesting words
artificially converted and so the same
with Central America artificially
converted the maeín Indians in
guatemalan had a better diet they had
more calories more protein and better
conditions of health in the early 16th
century before the Europeans came than
they do have today they had more artists
more musicians more architects more
horticulturalists than they do today
they are not underdeveloped they've been
over exploited
they've been mal developed
the legacy of u.s. economic dominance is
not only hunger and strife and misery
but an economic structure that bears
very little functional relationship to
the needs of Central America of the
people of Central America the most
important characteristic of the region's
economy is that it's dominated by a
network of international corporations
which themselves are beholden to parent
companies that have their place in North
America Europe and Japan roughly in that
order especially in North America if
there's there any harmonization by the
way these interests it's it's with the
global investor classes between them
they're harmonizing their interests
that's what's getting integrated not the
indigenous economies of these countries
NAFTA the North American Free Trade
Agreement is an attempt to rationalize
this it gives the total green light it
wipes away whatever political controls
that democratic forces have been able to
institute NAFTA will not integrate the
economies you hear that talk all the
time these economies are going to be
integrated her John Chancellor that
fatuous commentated wisdom peddler
saying well there was a time when we had
small villages and we had to move to a
regional economy then a regional economy
was enough we had to move to a national
economy and now we're all going to have
to move to a global economy just that's
all simple is that that's all it is a
benign ordinary development it's not an
integration into a global economy
because these capital investments
untrammeled ins they are actually
fragment the productive forces in these
countries any productive forces that
operate for the needs of the people just
look by with us look at our own country
just look at what free trade and
mobility of capital has done to the
industrial Midwest of the US we now even
have a term for we call the Rust Belt
it's a remarkable to admission isn't it
what just but it's something it just
happened you see the Central American
economies like those in most places in
the third world remain fragmented and
unintegrated both between each other
between
countries and within themselves both in
the flow of capital and goods and in
technology and organization a global
economy a world economy that has little
to do with the needs of the people of
the world that's a rather remarkable
thought when you think about him the
other legacy of economic domination is
political suppression and unspeakable
atrocities the counterinsurgency funded
and led by the United States in El
Salvador against a broadly based
liberation movement led to the deaths of
what by now maybe 70,000 Salvadorans
killed many thousands more believed to
be murdered by right-wing death squads
five hundred and forty thousand and fled
into exile another quarter of a million
have been displaced or forced into
resettlement camps this is all one
little country of Salvador a country of
only four million people but just about
everybody has been directly or
indirectly affected as either suffered
death or suffered a terrible loss of
loved ones or close ones the Salvadoran
Army massacred whole villages suspected
of being sympathetic to the guerrillas
an eyewitness victim interview taken by
then congresswoman Barbara Mikulski of a
Salvadoran peasant woman quote many
members of my family were killed I saw
children around the age of eight being
raped and then the soldiers would take
their bayonets and make mincemeat out of
them with their guns they would shoot at
their faces the army cut people up and
put soap and coffee in their stomachs as
a mocking they would slit the stomach of
a pregnant woman and take the child out
as if they were taking eggs out of an
iguana that is what I saw and yell
Salvador today in the US media and by
our US political leaders is called a
democracy Manuel de Concha
a peasant leader in Brazil was arrested
by the Brazilian security police when
them Quinton ran Brazil police who had
been schooled at u.s. army bases in the
his methods of counterinsurgency and
interrogation for his crime of
protesting the economic conditions of
his life and of his people this is how
Manuel was treated for four months I was
heavily tortured by the Army in Rio de
Janeiro and then in the naval
Information Center near death I was
taken to the hospital for the sixth time
the beatings had been so severe that my
body was one big bruise the blood
clotted under my skin in all the hair on
my body fell out they pulled out all my
fingernails they poked needles through
my sexual organs and used a rope to drag
me across the floor by my testicles
right afterwards they hung me upside
down by my ankles they hung me
handcuffed from a grating and tied my
penis so I could not urinate they forced
me to stand for three days without food
or drink they gave me so many drugs that
my eardrums burst and I am impotent they
nailed my penis to a table for 24 hours
they tied me up like a pig and threw me
into a pool so that I nearly drowned
they put me in a completely dark cell
where I remained for 30 days urinating
and defecating in the same place where I
had to sleep they fed me only bread
soaked in water they put me in a rubber
box and turned on a siren for three days
I neither ate nor slept and I nearly
went mad this was done by the defenders
of the Western world by the fenders of
the freeway you see the free market with
the aid and the training of the CIA and
other such groups victims of these
military and police but defenders of
democracy were financed by the US
tortured people with electric shock they
forced victims and this is in El
Salvador and in no Guatemala Honduras
not in Panama not in Nicaragua not in
Cuba these are the things they force
victims to witness the torture of
friends and relatives including children
they raped women in the presence
of other family members they burn sexual
organs with acid or scalding water they
place rats in women's vaginas and into
the mouths of of other prisoners they
mutilated punctured and cut off various
parts of the body including genitalia
eyes and tongue they injected air into
woman's breasts and into veins causing
slow painful death they shove bayonets
and clubs into the vagina or in the case
of men into the anus causing rupture and
death and I have other descriptions that
make that one look almost mild but I'm
going to skip them I think you get the
idea yet I would argue that imperialism
is rational it harnesses these cruel and
horrible and twisted impulses it enlists
them it instigates them it instigates
them these guys weren't born torturers I
mean they didn't go around and say who's
been ripping out the arms of rabbits and
chickens you can come work for us they
took ordinary guys and said we are going
to train you as professionals and
torturers have testified that we are
professionals we use certain methods to
get some to elicit information and we
have to do this and it's it's a tough
job and all that and the guys who
financed them or sit in Langley Virginia
say yeah heck I mean you know it's a
jungle out there I don't know I'm not
that happy about the kind of methods we
sometimes have to use but when you're
facing these tough kind of people you
got to use the same methods they do and
so forth so on hmm in other words you
always justify your crimes by saying
that your victim was the criminal that's
a rational process of training torturers
for what is a rational set of interests
they didn't go down there for torturing
just for the sake of torture they use
torture in order to be down there and
stay down there and defend their
privileges and their interests I want to
make that point because sometimes
imperial domination is explained as
arising from the will to dominate and in
a desire for territorial expansion
a territorial imperative but in fact
territorial imperialism is not the
dominant mode it hasn't been in
generations today there's a very
relatively little colonial Dominion I
mean the u.s. controls Puerto Rico Guam
a few other places what you have today
is neo imperialism where the country has
its nominal independence its own
president in his own currency in its own
police moet and all you do is you
control its exports and imports its land
as we did with Cuba sugar tobacco its
tourist trade and all those other things
you allow them the trappings of
sovereignty while you control the wealth
I heard someone at the World Affairs
Council I went there to hear a friend
speak and someone got up from the
audience a lot of academics and
professionals and all that world affairs
council types and he said well you know
ironically Cuba has come full cycle
since the days before the Revolution
before the Revolution the tourist trade
was only for the Yankees the hotels &
beaches were only for the foreigners and
the Cubans needed Yankee dollars to use
them and today it's the same thing
ironically Cuba is back to its
pre-revolutionary position there are
beaches for foreigners the dollar
beaches Aviv dollars you know cos Cuba
is so strapped for hard currency there
are hotels where following a stay the
Cubans couldn't afford it they don't
have the dollars and all right so it's
the same and I got up and I said no it's
not the same because the surplus value
or the profits of the pre-revolutionary
trade went to big corporations gamblers
mobsters whorehouse owners and the like
generals on the take and such and today
the surplus value that is received by
the Cubans goes to the government what
the Cubans have done is they said we
have so few hard currency resources one
of them is our Sun and our beautiful
beaches and all that let's try to start
a tourist trade and make that a source
of hard currency and that's where we do
where that money goes back to the people
and pays for their health clinics and
their education and these other things
so Cuba is not in the same place if Cuba
work in exactly the same place it was
before the Revolution this government
will be hugging and kissing the Cubans
they'd be giving support like they do to
shove a Nazi or Yeltsin or Havel on one
of those people we wouldn't still have
the blockade in the embargo and
squeezing them as is until that surplus
value until every penny of it
goes back to the fuel and is taken out
of the hands of the many there will be
antagonism toward Cuba the US policy to
a Central America for almost two
centuries has consisted of the three
eyes interference invasion and
investment not the outgrowth of any kind
of democratic national dialogue or
consensus between the American people
and their leaders it's not the response
to democratic pressure it's not the
result of mass jingoism a longing for
invasion or power expansion of war or
popular hysteria the history books tell
us that about the spanish-american war
that it was a popular hysteria I've done
my study of it most people in 1898
weren't interested in going to war they
were trying to get jobs the labor
movement in the US had very little
interest in the overseas expansion and
in fact was for the most part opposed
not all the same with the Gulf War they
very jingo war in July 90 most Americans
the opinion polls showed most Americans
favorite negotiated settlements which is
what the Iraqis also favored it was only
after several months of media war
hysteria and White House war hysteria
and hyping it up and pumping it up and
the actual commitment of troops and the
promise of a quick easy win that the US
public got on its yellow ribbon binge
and even at the time some of you may
remember I said they're going to develop
a postpartum depression they're going to
come down
Yellow Ribbon high and the American
people have the habit of then drifting
off into reality and they have to
forcefully be shoved back to face the
harsh illusions of the ruling elites and
indeed that happen with conqueror George
Bush the guy who has had a 93 percent
approval rating by the end of it
couldn't even beat Bill Clinton in the
election so that kind of jingle isn't
when it is hyped up is ephemeral and
short-lived in other words these
policies of invasion interference and an
investment do not come because we we
want them I make this point because it's
an important thing I remember being at
the City University of New York on a
panel Michael Harrington was on it knew
speaking and somebody from the audience
said Michael why is us farm policy so
stupid to Michael Harrington and Michael
Harrington said well we are the good
Germans we have this power thing we are
the busy parties and we try to go here
and there when we shouldn't and we he
went on and I responded I said you know
I have to disagree with that maybe the
confusion is in using this word we we
don't make this policy they do and the
policy isn't stupid it's remarkably
successful and brutal for their in their
interest it's stupid to us because it
does it doesn't do anything for us is
it's cost us money it doesn't give us
anything but Wars and tribulations and
all but it's very useful for they so
maybe we should stop saying we do this
and we go there it's a very rational
policy to support governments that are
open to US corporate interests and to
oppose or overthrow governments be they
communist or populist or whatever that
have some measure of independent
development and some measure of
redistribution of surplus-value even the
country like Iraq even a country like
Libya where there's some redistribution
of surplus-value that is the country
that will be targeted that is the
criteria in every instance for the most
part
and to many analysts the late Michael
Harrington used this word we Howard Zinn
uses we I notice I've got to tell Howard
about this sometime Noam Chomsky uses we
in his weaker quicker moments Ramsey
Clark my Ramsey Clark gets up and gives
these brilliant powerful moving talks
about Iraq and what he's done he's keep
saying we and we've done this to them
and we've done that of them I want to
Ramsey Ramsey I'm sitting missing or
wasn't we know we should stop saying
wait and this is more than semantics
it's really in a very important point
because it is defining political reality
because those who keep saying we might
often fall into the mistake of treating
the nation as the basic unit of analysis
and International Affairs sometimes it
is but often it isn't even sometimes in
simple nation state territorial
rivalries the issues are defined by
political economic elites who are less
likely to serve the interests of the
general populace and more likely to
define their own interests as the
general interest and every time you say
we they love it you're playing right
into their hands
these policies don't just happen there
is conscious will pursuing a conscious
goal and conscious intent and conscious
interest is it true brothers and sisters
that unlike the rest of us the rich and
powerful don't act with conscious intent
not only economic policy doesn't happen
the economy itself just doesn't happen I
mean the economy what is the economy you
ever think I mean strictly speaking
there's no such thing as the economy
nobody has ever seen an economy
you cannot touch or see or feel an
economy what you can see are people
engaged in exchange of values in
productive labor and in not such
productive labor and we take all these
different actualities and activities and
we take them together and we form what
is called a hypothetical construct and
we abstract from that we call that the
economy it's a hypothetical construct
abstracted from observable or actuality
now our abstractions are very powerful
things like other abstractions this one
becomes reified entry you see first you
abstract from the reality and then you
endow it with a mechanical reality
promote above its own sort of a
conceptual Jurassic Park or something so
now we talk about the economy as a
self-generating force the problems of
the economy not the problems of
capitalism not the problems of what the
corporation's are doing to us with the
problems of the economy the economy
becomes an entity of its own so we hear
statements like the economy is in a
slump the economy is in the doldrums you
get the image of this big bulky moody
economy the economy is making a comeback
like a sports hero the one that always
catches my attention the economy is
acting funny
you are listening to author and
political analyst Michael Parenti on the
sword and the dollar at the end of the
program there will be information on how
to obtain a copy of this talk we do the
same thing with the whole concept of
nation it's reified and abstracted what
the nation does what the United States
does this in the United States does that
and we do this and when we get us out
into that so we are reifying even when
we say we we should start asking when we
hear one of our leaders or our media
pundits say our interest necessitate
this action or we're looking out for US
interests
what are US interests by the way that
question first started to intrigue me
back in 1967 I was writing my first book
and I sat I was a postdoctoral fellow at
Yale University and I sat in the
Sterling Memorial Library and I went
through about 30 volumes of the
Department of State bulletins and huge
volumes of these bulletins you know what
I was looking for I was looking for what
US interests were was the night of the
Vietnam War and I kept hearing about was
our interest us interest so I said I
kind of find out what these interests
are and I went through these volumes
they answered they remember the
librarian said what are you looking for
you I know you don't take any notes you
look at you keep getting volume ten
eleven twelve fourteen hundred and seven
and I'm going through looking for
finally I came across one instance of
yours interest that's very interesting
when it was mentioned that US presence
would be taken as a u.s. interest you
see so we said it is in our interest to
maintain a presence in that area right I
found was William Bundy State Department
officials said it is now interest to
maintain our military bases in the
Philippines I came off my seat here it
is US interest I'm going to find out
finally is to maintain these bases now
that's very interesting because normally
you would have thought the bases were
there to maintain US interests but now
we hear that US interests
u.s. interest is to maintain the basis
the instrumental value becomes its own
end value a common thing in human
thought in old man and then one day he
went on he said but there's a more
important US interest in the Philippines
this is the only one I only example I
could find all these volumes and again I
went even further to the edge of my seat
now my palms were getting kind of sweaty
from the excitement and I quote what he
said he was speaking to an audience in
Manila toward a us and Filipino elite
audience in Manila and he said the
Philippines means so much to the United
States because the Filipino people have
so often demonstrated that across
barriers of oceans and cultures this is
a country the Philippines where
Americans are always as Filipinos so
often say made to feel quote at home the
touching statement at home is a
peculiarly Filipino phrase against in
other words if I understood Bundy most
important interest in the Philippines
was the preservation and Filipino
hospitality by the way there there
wasn't the dry eye in the audience I
imagine well one could say look Parenti
this complaint about the mass of the
people not making policy is a truism
it's true of all public policy it's not
formulated by the masses you'll be
loving masses whom you idealize average
people have a low level of information
by any objective measurement they have
no input in the policy process
government policy both domestic and
foreign almost always are almost always
has its origin in elite circles
political economic elites think tanks
the higher circles of government and
corporate worlds the council Foreign
Relations the Trilateral Commission the
bankers the CEOs the investors the top
managers that publicist the policy
specialists the journalists all these
kinds of high-powered personages they're
the ones who become the secretaries of
state defense Treasury Commerce
they become the heads of the CIA in the
National Security Council
they monopolize policy they create
policy the most we can help for from the
public the argument continues is that at
election time it gives its stamp of
approval or disapproval to one or
another policy elite so the argument
goes this by the way this model of elite
democracy was enunciated by many Joseph
Schumpeter by walter Lippmann and the
like
most recently by conservative political
scientists like Diane Ziegler and by the
great political theorist a sparrow Agnew
and I knew I was going to get a laugh by
than just saying that name in response I
would say not true it's not true that
all policy originates with policy elites
an ounce of data is worth a pound of
polemic I would say I would say just the
opposite that almost all policy that is
worthwhile all policy that is worthwhile
all of it that is life-affirming
all of it that is democratic in its
substantive output all that policy has
come from the common ordinary people the
struggle for women's rights the struggle
for women's rights for a hundred years
what presidents what presidents what
cabinet members what high power policy
specialists what one in that hundred
years name one that came out for women's
rights and talked about it who there was
one there was one the way from one
Eleanor Roosevelt she was the wife of a
present that's the closest women got to
it the struggle for civil rights what
what one name name the great policy
leaders the great political economic
financial leaders at least who what one
of them twelve years in the White House
FDR never once came out for fppc Fair
Employment Practice Commission never
once came out against Jim Crow harry s
truman finally did but he reluctantly in
very marginal ways JFK was downright
opposed to Martin Luther King's
mobilization March on
Washington and he wished that the whole
civil rights agitation could have gone
away because it led to uncomfortable
schisms in the face of his support name
the political economic elites of the
19th century who fought for and not
against the 10-hour day namely elites
who fought for the eight-hour day who
originated who got the idea who
generated who built the base who brought
forth all the pamphlets and and the
calls and the organizations and
everything else who faced up to the
police name the political economic
elites who fought for the right to
collective bargaining name them
Franklin Roosevelt it finally came out
with a collective bargaining bill the
National Labor Relations Act that was a
SAP he was tossing out he had no idea
that the people in America were going to
grab it and go on into industrial unions
ation millions of people were going to
want to move suddenly because collective
bargaining and the right to have unions
was now legal they could face their
their town sheriff's and state militia
and police feeling they had the federal
government behind them but that was only
after years and years of agitation there
at the other end of the policy process
when it comes to Democratic policy
reluctantly responding to it name name
the great policy political leaders and
captains of industry name them who
struggled for public education who
struggled to end child labor who
struggled for clean and safe drinking
water so there couldn't be no more
typhoid epidemics in Philadelphia and
Baltimore places like that who struggled
for safe housing codes who struggled for
public parks there were individuals some
of them from privileged backgrounds by
the way who fought for those things were
usually not when they were in government
they were in government they couldn't
fall for them if these were the things
that the rich and the powerful had
wanted they wouldn't have to be you
wouldn't say the struggle for this the
struggle for that they would have just
had him he would have had to struggle
for them
and so today named who were the big who
the big political leaders right in the
last 20 years named them who originated
the environmental movement only when
that movement got a mass base that you
find a vice president wrote a book about
it
name them this came from the public from
the concerns of lay persons from lay
organizations like this one
self-supporting that after have bake
sales and and speeches in and whatever
else to grab money together to have some
visibility and organization to push for
this thing devoted to pressuring the
Environmental Protection Agency to do
what it should be doing anyway an
Environmental Protection Agency that was
created only in response to those
pressures to try to sort of give him the
impression that government was looking
after this thing after well the consumer
protection market who started that I'll
tell you started consumers started
getting unsafe products and medications
off the market that's not what a
capitalist government does taking goods
off the market the function of a
capitalist government is to get things
on the market it's too busy doing that
getting things on the market with
subsidies and export supports even for
lethal tobacco products and investment
tax breaks free research and development
for the corporate producers that's what
governments busy doing they're
generating that kind of policy they're
too busy to protect the consumer the
consumer has to protect herself and
himself the ban on tobacco and liquor
advertising who originated that idea
tell me the fearless political leader
who went up against the tobacco lobby
and said I got a new original idea we're
going to ban you no no it was down here
it was down here and here and it has to
percolate up and finally push them and
push them to do something maybe you have
more power than you realize the
anti-nuclear movement don't tell me that
was government the government was up to
its ears in hiding and hiding the crimes
the toxic waste to fallout the murder of
GIS and down winders in Utah and atomic
energy workers in the plans hiding how
they were dying like flies from exposure
they were too busy
hiding it to be fighting the unsafe
features of the nuclear movement the
Freedom of Information Act who or the
political leaders named one who came out
for that that was the public demand
government's job is not to free
information government's job is to
restrict to seal files to put them on
the security not open to the public
inking out manipulating and changing
history keeping us from knowing what
they did so reaffirming to you again and
again that what they do is legitimate
and honest and wise and true but not
letting you know what they did or why
they did it and giving you the document
with 2/3 of it inked out their job is to
undermine the Freedom of Information Act
our job is to fight for it if government
were really interested in protecting the
public interest rather than the private
power structure in the private profit
ears now I don't want to overstate it
policy elites have played a creative
role in some areas but it's very
important to be balanced those said
Parenti you should be balanced we've had
98% of the other side and your 2% is
just too truthful and it's tipping the
scales too much so let's give them
credit let's try to be balanced the
thing policy elites have play to create
a role the Manhattan Project to build an
atomic bomb the nuclear industry then
hand it over to private business at a
fraction of its cost and subsidize
repeatedly billions of dollars every
year the creativeness FBI CIA the
national security state apparatus the
global military apparatus 300 major
bases around the world and by the way
talk about closing bases how about
starting to close overseas bases all the
focus is on the domestic bases close the
open they closed one in the Philippines
and that's because it took a volcano to
kind of turn it to trash it and then the
Filipino Senate said close it then they
finally closed one McCarthyism
ideological witch-hunts loyalty and
security programs these were all started
by our
native policy elites far eight programs
to military dictators and torturers
those electric shock instruments that
they use to put on the genitals of
peasant leaders those were made and
brought down there by the CIA that's a
lot of Technology in hardware getting
into Wars creating crises that justify
military intervention the secret
surveillance of our personal lives
intervention in Guatemala El Salvador
Nicaragua the invasion of Panama Grenada
Iraq the move into Somalia
remember the mass movement of people
demonstrating the streets please let's
send troops to Somalia but did you
remember that I guess we were all away
that weekend northern so they can show
their creative in death squads torture
squads bombings and missiles policies
that control destroy dominate and
manipulate I'm giving you a picture here
now whose interest do they serve if
certain kinds of life-affirming policies
have to be struggled with and fought for
and you have to take every little bit
right out of it teeth in them they're
greedy little paws whereas these other
policies that doing all the time we have
to struggle then to find out even that
the policy happened what is it they're
doing they're too busy practicing
militarism and fascism in order to
bolster capitalism
all the while claiming to be saving
democracy from communism or now to save
democracy from demon dictators warlords
terrorists and the like Joseph
Schumpeter wrote the conservative
economist that capitalism means peace
that imperialism exists because it's a
residue of the old swashbuckling feudal
times the Colonel blimp thing that in
fact here's his quote industrial and
commercial activity is essentially
unheroic in the ninth sense and the
ideology that glorifies the idea of
fighting for fighting sake
understandably withers in the office
among all the columns of figures
capitalism is too busy
just getting that bottom line together
and producing doing that stuff to go off
on these silly imperialism's now is he
serious he was writing this the early
part of this century when British
imperialism was at its height and US
imperialism
was taking off don't underestimate the
ability of class apologists to fabricate
images out of whole cloth he was writing
at a time when the soldier clerk sneeze
India Company with their accounting
books in one hand in the Gatling guns
and other were killing Indians when the
various European capitalist states were
engaged in bloody wars with each other
about carving up the third world and
Africa Asia Latin America whatever else
but by the way as ridiculous as he
sounds he's no different from what we
hear today other conservative theorists
right off empire it's just as a general
impulse to dominate but doesn't explain
why they want to dominate some people
rather than other people we hear a lot
that it was George Bush's macho impulses
that led him to go invade Panama by the
way I have no doubt that he was
considering his macho image in the polls
and all that and how that would work but
it doesn't explain why he hit Panama why
doesn't he go and invade Mexico or
Canada or whatever it doesn't explain
why certain kinds of countries are hit
I'm sure Clinton's bombing of Iraq was
his presidential blooding and macho
flexing of muscles he can't stand up to
the Senate Judiciary Committee so he
turns around he goes out killed some
more Iraqis show so that he's tough I
mean why is this macho impulse going and
always on the side of the landowners
this need to dominate what is always
going on inside of the corporate
investors rather than on the side of the
peasants the workers the students and
the clergy who want social change I mean
Robin Hood was macho he was macho you
can be macho many different ways for
many different causes macho for peace
macho for equality macho for treating
women with respect in humanity what's
left out of such impulse theory is the
whole
matrix of class and corporate interests
such theories divorce politics from
economics and attach them to a kind of
homespun a historical psycho politics or
psychologism shrimp ada is much better
when he talks about ancient imperialism
ones that didn't involve his own
particular class listen to what he says
about ancient Rome Rome pursued that
policy which pretends to aspire to peace
but unerringly generates war the policy
of continual preparation for war the
policy of meddlesome interventionism
there was no corner of the known world
where some interest was not alleged to
be in danger or under actual attack if
the interest were not Roman they were
those of Rome's allies and if Rome had
no allies then allies would be invented
when it was utterly impossible to
contrive such an interest why then it
was the National Honor that had been
insulted the fight was always invested
with an aura of legality Rome was always
being attacked by evil minded neighbors
always fighting for breathing space the
whole world was pervaded by a host of
enemies and was manifestly Rome's duty
to guard against their indubitably
aggressive designs they were enemies who
only waited to fall upon the Roman
people now does that sound familiar at
all clearly now these are the rationales
for expansion but they're not the
motives they're not the actual real
interest well we hear that today that
there's a world out there of adversaries
who are just waiting to fall upon the
American people they don't for some
reason fall upon Denmark they don't fall
upon Spain or Brazil but they fall upon
us but soon fade it I said he was very
good about ancient imperialism he says
the real motives in Rome
not all these manufactured incidents
motives can only be understood by
looking at quote what domestic class
interests benefitted from the Empire
those who gain with the aristocracy of
landlords agricultural entrepreneurs
born of struggle against their own
people whose dominance rested on control
of the state machine he had it right on
target
Schumpeter the conservative had a
Marxist analysis of ancient Rome because
it was 2,000 years away he felt
comfortable enough to say the truth now
that's not a Marxist analysis that just
happens to be reality March didn't
invent that he just discovered that it
was one of the people to state it the
historian Ernst baby an adze to the idea
about ancient Rome he said no
Administration in history has ever
devoted itself so wholeheartedly to
fleecing its subjects for the private
benefit of its ruling class as did Rome
he was writing before the Bush Reagan
Clinton era
well let me end right here and say that
what we should do what is to be done and
I'm not going to answer anymore what can
we do questions I'm going to answer them
right now is we must above all emphasize
the costs of empire to our own people to
point out that we have a community of
interests not with that Wayne we talked
about up there not with the Veii but we
have a community interest with the
common people of these other countries
the incredible tax burden that we bear
the military burden the subsequent
starvation of human services and things
the price this has affected on us in
terms of crime poverty and
underemployment the environmental costs
this huge military establishment is the
single biggest polluter in America the
US Air Force Army Navy the distorting
effects of on the economy and technology
the exportation of jobs the threat to
democracy that comes from a national
security state the surveillance the
secrecy the irresponsible state power
the suppression of dialogue the wars and
the killings that some of our young
people come back as victims in plastic
bags to so we must emphasize that these
policies are not supporting our
interests it's not just a matter but be
noble be sacrificing be caring for the
poor little people there you tell people
this and if they have a suspicion that
their own interests are involved and the
government is supporting their interests
then they'll choose their interests over
and against any noble sentiments about
other people but if you point out how in
fact this government is no way in no way
supporting their interests then they
sometimes begin to listen and so we must
educate agitate organize demonstrate
support alternative media alternative
organizations and pressure our officials
try what we can to break the ideological
monopoly there is
immense ideological monopoly on Foreign
Affairs you can get debate about some
issues you know toxic waste dumps health
care this that it is almost impossible
to get any debate on foreign policy
other than tactical strategic so you
know the kind of thing you hear in those
Sunday afternoon TV panel discussions
you have you cannot get people raising
the questions of the kind of race today
people of this persuasion do not get on
the mass media
we must above all deny the community of
interest with the rulers see who our
enemies really are our enemies are those
who profess to be our leaders our
enemies are amidst us in our living
rooms every evening on the TV set
challenge the ideological totalitarian
monopoly of government and media it
ain't easy because they do control most
of it the monopoly that does not allow
this kind of critique to come before the
American people push for things like
Panama deception an Academy
award-winning movie documentary that was
suppressed completely in the mass media
shown only on KQED PBS or a few evenings
and only them because there's a reform
movement at KQED see they didn't do it
regardless of but because of that
challenge in above all don't worry about
your legitimacy and credibility the way
to win credibility is to speak the truth
as forcefully and clearly as possible
it's one thing to tone down the rhetoric
it's another thing to dilute the content
never dilute the content never blunt
your sword
as forcefully as clearly as possible
speak the truth as I hope I've done
today thank
Oh